# Assignment 3

1.

a) As the labour increases initially, the marginal product of labour increases, since for example, adding one more worker to a one-person sandwich operation could allow you to double your output and improve efficiency. The same is true for the average product of labour, which is the total product of labour divided by the quantity of labour. The labour increase will initially have a more significant effect on the amount of product produced, provided that the product and industry is one that can benefit from additional labour.

b) AS the quantity of labour continues to increase, eventually the marginal product will decrease and reach zero or even negative values according to the law of diminishing labour. This makes sense, because there comes a point where an additional set of hands, or an extra pair of eyes results in more work, rather than helping to create more product. In the food preparation example, we all have experience with their being too many cooks in the kitchen and the additional labour can lead to decreasing and eventually negative marginal product. In terms of the average product of labour, added labour eventually results in a lower average product of labour. For example, If there are two chefs in the kitchen who can make 10 sandwiches an hour, and if having three cooks only results in 12 sandwiches per hour, then the average product of labour has decreased from $\frac{10}{2} = 5$ to $\frac{12}{3} = 4$. While average labour initially increased, over time the average product of labour will decrease as a result of the costs, overhead, and management required by more labour.

2.

I wasn't sure about the wording of this question and had two interpretations:

Interpretation 1: that the plan is for Mary to invest her money only if she farms and only makes the 10% one-time return on her savings if she invested it because of farming.

Interpretation 2: By investing her $20000, we mean that she is taking it out of the bank and using it to invest in her new farming business. This means that she is not making the 10% return on her savings if she had just left it in the bank.

I think interpretation 2 is the correct interpretation and will use it below, where she has a foregone cost by becoming a farmer of the 10% savings.

a)

Implicit costs = money forgone by not working at the store + money forgone by not keeping her savings in the bank = $16000 + $2000 = $18000
Explicit costs = cost of farming equipment = $5000

`Total cost of farming = opportunity cost of production = implicit cost + explicit cost = $18000 + $5000 = $23000`

b)

Economic profit is defined as `total revenue - total cost`. Her total revenue from farming is not currently known, but her total cost is her implicit and explicit costs, where implicit costs are the sum of all hidden opportunity costs forgone, such as the forgone wages from the store, and the explicit costs are the direct costs associated with the factors of production, such as the cost of the fertilizer and seed.

c)

Considering Mary's revenue of $30000, we see that her economic profit is $7000.
This is because her total revenue is $30000 and the total cost is $23000, resulting in profit of $7000.

$$
\begin{aligned}
E_{p} = T_{r} - T_{c} \\
= 30000 - 23000 \\
= 7000
\end{aligned}
$$

Since she is making an economic profit, resources are being used efficiently and farming is a viable option for Mary.

d)

Considering Mary's revenue of $20000, we see that her economic profit is $-3000.
This is because her total revenue is $20000 and the total cost is $23000, resulting in profit of $-3000, a loss of profit.

$$
\begin{aligned}
E_{p} = T_{r} - T_{c} \\
= 20000 - 23000 \\
= -3000
\end{aligned}
$$

Under this scenario, her profit is negative and being a farmer is not a viable option for Mary under this scenario.

3.

When a new technology is adopted by a firm, the supply curve for the product in the market shifts right, as they are able to produce more product at the same cost because of the better technology. Since there is more supply for the product, but the same demand, the price of the product decreases on the market. Other self-interested firms now face an economic loss because in a perfectly competitive market, they were operating at zero economic profit. The other firms still produce the same amount of product at the same cost, but it's price has fallen and they now incur losses.

These self-interested firms must either stop producing all-together, or use the new technology in order to get out of the loss and return profit to zero.

4.

a)

In prefect competition, when the market demand increases, in the short run the increased demand will drive the price of the good up because there is a shortage of the good, and the output remains the same, meaning that each firm in the market will make more than their average total cost and have a profit in the short-run.

b)

In perfect competition, when market demand decreases, the price for a good falls since there is a surplus of the good, and firms experience an economic loss, since they are producing the same quantity of goods at the same cost, but at a lower price. Their revenue drop below their average total cost since they were operating at zero economic profit.

5.

In a perfectly competitive market, the marginal social benefit is equal to the marginal social cost, and resources are allocated efficiently, with no loss of consumer or producer surplus. In a single-price monopoly, however, the monopoly tries to maximize producer surplus and increase profit by selling goods at the price on the marginal social benefit line going up from the marginal revenue line, which increases price and decreases output. While this drives up producer surplus, it decreases consumer surplus and results in a deadweight loss of total surplus. This means that the resources are allocated inefficiently and the goods are not being produced at the great possible benefit. While producer is making more profit, there is a total decrease in combined consumer and producer surplus.

6.

In a perfectly competitive market, the firms are producing such that the marginal social benefit equals the marginal social cost, and there is zero economic profit. If the demand for ethanol goes up, then the demand for corn goes up. Consequently in the short run, the price for corn will go up, since the demand has increased but the output has remained the same and the market experiences a shortage resulting in an increase in corn price. This means that in the short-run, existing firms in the corn business experience an economic profit. In the long-run, since there is no barrier to entry, new firms will enter the market and the supply of corn will increase to match demand. The price will fall back to the previous, assuming no externalities, and the total output will increase. Since the price eventually drops down to previous levels, the firms will ultimately return to zero economic profit.

7.

a)

Since Canada Post has a monopoly, it has no close substitutes. Pfizer, which makes LIPITOR, could have substitutes that are other drugs that help to lower cholesterol. Rogers has no substitutes in the parts of Ontario where it is the sole cable television provider. In the parts where it is not the sole provider, there could be substitutes like the television services provided by competitors like Bell, for example.

b)

Canada Post has a legal barrier to entry for other firms because it is a crown corporation and has the support of the government in terms of residential mail delivery. Since it is a monopoly, it has no close substitutes and the support of the government gives them an advantage over potential competitors who face a strong legal barrier to entry.

Pfizer has a legal barrier to entry as well in the form of a patent for the LIPITOR drug. No other firms can produce LIPITOR without their permission and if others want to produce cholesterol-lowering drugs, they need to find an unpatented solution. If they do, they may face another barrier to entry, this time a natural barrier. There are many costs associated with large-scale production of drugs and economies of scale may make it so that a market with only one cholesterol-lowering drug can minimize cost and supply the whole market.

Rogers Communications has a natural barrier to entry, because the cost of setting up cable television infrastructure in rural areas is very high. Setting up this infrastructure at a large-scale may mean that it is cheaper for Rogers to do it than if two companies tried to. This would mean that Rogers has a natural monopoly in these areas, because they can supply the whole market at the lowest price.

c)

Canada Post is a legal monopoly, because they are a crown corporation and are enterprises owned by the Crown or Queen. A legal monopoly is one where a firm holds patents, copyrights or government licenses to provide a good or service. Since Canada Post is a monopoly supported by the government, this is an example of a firm that has a legal monopoly.

The LIPITOR drug made by Pfizer is also a legal monopoly, since they hold the patents to that drug and have legal support in being the only company allowed to sell that prescription drug. Any competitor would have a significant barrier to entry because they need to discover another way to lower cholesterol that is different from LIPITOR and this gives Pfizer a legal monopoly for this product.

d)

Monopolies that exhibit price discrimination often face intervention from the government in the form of regulations that influences the prices, or quantity or barriers to entry for a firm and forces the firm to act more in the benefit of society.

Since Canada Post is a crown corporation itself, the government wants to act in the best interest of society and will be the least likely to be able to profit from price discrimination as it would go against the benefit of society supported by the government.

Of the three firms, Pfizer is most likely to profit from price discrimination, because they have a legal monopoly on the market due to their patent on the drug, and because consumers have a high tolerance for paying more for products that they deem are important to their health. If Pfizer charges a lot more for certain groups of people, those people will still pay for it because the drug people regard health as more important then price up until a very high tolerance threshold and because they are often told to use the drug by someone they trust, such as a doctor. Pfizer can charge one price to a hospital or pharmacy in need of the drug and another price to a different group based on how much they believe the party will pay for their product. Because there are no alternatives and the recipients have a high price tolerance, Pfizer is likely the most able to profit from price discrimination.

8.

The total fixed cost is fixed across all units, so if the average fixed cost is 120 for 10 units, then we can calculate the average fixed cost for 20 units:

$$
\begin{aligned}
120 = \frac{T_{fc}}{10} \\
T_{fc} = 1200
\end{aligned}
$$

Therefore for 20 units, the total fixed cost is $1200 / $20 = $60 and A = $60.

Since the average fixed cost and average variable cost add together to get the average total cost, then B is $150 - $60 = $90.

In calculating C, we see that the marginal cost is $130 per unit. This was an increase of $130 per unit for 10 units, so the total cost is the previous total cost of $130 * 30 = $3900 + $1300 = $5200. At 40 units, then the ATC is $5200 / 40 = D = $130.

Then since $30 + AVC = $130, then AVC = C = $100.

Finally, to calculate E, we see that the previous total cost was $5200, and the new total cost is $132 * 50 = $6600. This means that over a product increase of 10 units, the total cost went up by $6600 - $5200 = $1400, meaning that the marginal cost was $1400 / 10 = $140 = E.

Therefore:
A = $60
B = $90
C = $100
D = $130
E = $140

9.

Some consumer products are cheaper to buy in bulk because some companies would rather sell products at lower profit per item in order to increase the quantity of product sold and earn greater economic profit through higher sales, rather than higher prices. If the company raises their prices, they will be able to make more per item, but they sell less. If they realize that due to economies of scale, they are able to decrease costs by increasing production, then it makes sense to produce a large quantity of product at lower costs and less profit, because overall this will equate to greater economic profit than if they had sold less product at greater cost and greater price.

Some businesses offer "buy one, get one half price" because if they sold both units at half-off the price, they could be making very little, or even negative profit. In the case where a company charges $10 per unit, and $5 for the second unit at half price, at a cost of $6 per unit, then a company that sells two at half price will lose $2. But with the half-off price model, they get revenue of $15 and cost of $12, so they actually make profit this way. The goal is for the price of the first unit to generate enough profit to offset the smaller profit or negative profit that they receive from the second unit. This way they look attractive to consumers and make more than if they sold both at half-off.

10.

a)

Yes I believe the firm is making an economic profit because the market price is $2.00, so for 100 units their revenue is $200, while their average total cost is $1.6, making the total cost $1.6 * 100 = $160. Therefore the economic profit is the total revenue - total cost = $40. Therefore the firm is making an economic profit.

b)

Since the firm is at the minimum ATC at 100 units, the more units they create, the greater the cost and eventually the marginal cost will exceed the marginal revenue and the firm will stop producing units. Since the marginal revenue is $2.00 per unit at 100 units, they should be able to increase its profit by increasing output further, since the price is greater than the average variable cost. Once the price is equal to the average variable cost, they will not be money and should stop output, but for now, increasing output will increase profit.

c)

The firm's economic profit in the long run will be zero, since in a perfectly competitive market, there are no barriers to entry and additional firms can enter the market and charging less than the current firm by producing at a lower price but for the same cost. The firm will be forced to lower prices or leave the industry. The greater supply will drive the price down ever further and eventually the marginal social benefit will equal the marginal social cost, and the economic profit for the firm will be zero.
